OCR for Printed & Handwritten Text Detection

Documentation

OCR for Printed & Handwritten Text Detection - Documentation

Project Description

This project provides an OCR solution capable of detecting printed and handwritten text from images. Initially developed using Google Colab to quickly iterate on ideas and test the model, this repository offers a complete and ready-to-use solution. The project aims to assist in digitizing handwritten notes, content extraction, and document scanning, with ongoing efforts to improve recognition for more complex handwriting styles.

Key Features

1. Printed Text Detection

	•	Extracts printed text accurately and efficiently. This feature can be used for digitizing books, forms, and any other printed content.

2. Handwritten Text Detection

	•	Optimized for recognizing neat handwriting, with continuous improvements being made to handle messy or varied handwriting. This capability makes it applicable for transcribing notes, recognizing handwriting on forms, and more.

3. Simple Input

	•	The system only requires an image path, making it easy to use for a wide range of applications.

4. Real-World Applications

	•	Document Digitization: Automatically transcribe printed or handwritten documents into digital text.
	•	Content Moderation: Identify text from images for content filtering and moderation.
	•	Accessibility: Help individuals with visual impairments by reading printed and handwritten text aloud.

Setup & Installation

Prerequisites

	•	Python 3.6+
	•	EasyOCR: For text recognition.
	•	OpenCV: For image processing.

Installation Steps

	1.	Clone the repository:

git clone https://github.com/your-username/ocr-text-detection.git
cd ocr-text-detection


	2.	Install required libraries:

pip install -r requirements.txt


	3.	Ensure that EasyOCR and OpenCV are installed:

pip install easyocr opencv-python


How to Use

	1.	Place your image file in the same directory as the script.
	2.	Update the IMAGE_PATH variable with the path to your image:

IMAGE_PATH = "path_to_your_image.jpeg"


	3.	Run the OCR function:

process_image(IMAGE_PATH)



The output will be an image with rectangles drawn around the detected text, along with the extracted text printed on the screen.

Future Enhancements

	•	Improved Handwriting Detection: Expanding the model to better handle different handwriting styles.
	•	Noisy Image Handling: Enhance performance on blurry or low-quality images.
	•	Multi-Language Support: Support for different languages to broaden the scope of usage.

This version focuses on showcasing the technical aspects and the value of your project, making it appealing to recruiters. The README is direct and clear, with a focus on what makes the project useful and impactful. The documentation emphasizes your future work and the real-world applications of the project.
